From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[music]
On Wednesday, the Supreme Court heard
arguments in the biggest [music] case of
its term about whether the president has
the authority to impose the highest
tariffs the country has seen [music] in
a century.
Today, my colleague, [music] Adam
Liptac, explains why the court seemed
like it might be willing to say no to
this president.
It's Thursday, [music] November 6th.
Hi, Adam.
>> Hello, Rachel.
>> Thanks for being with us today. It was
obviously a very busy day for the
Supreme Court, which was taking up one
of Trump's signature policies, tariffs.
just to start, can you walk us through
what was at stake in this case?
>> So, this is easily the most closely
watched case of the term. It involves
President Trump's central signature
initiative, tariffs. And it's also the
court's biggest confrontation yet with
the scope of executive power in the
second Trump administration. And the
question in the case was huge. It was
whether or not Congress has authorized
President Trump to pursue tariffs which
are his main lever in international
relations and he says protecting the
nation's security.
>> And just to be really clear, Adam, why
would the president not have the
authority to impose tariffs? Article one
of the constitution which lays out
Congress's powers is quite clear that
the power to tax and tariffs are a form
of taxation and the power to regulate
international commerce is for Congress
and Congress can let the president have
part of its authority. But this is a
situation in which the constitution is
quite clear that Congress needs to
authorize this kind of activity that
this is not something the president can
do without that authorization.
>> But Trump obviously imposed tariffs in
his first term. So why was that allowed
to stand and yet these tariffs in his
second term are being so contested?
>> There are laws that allow the president
to impose tariffs in limited situations.
Laws that specifically use the word
tariffs. and authorized the president to
take action. But those were limited
actions in the first Trump term. In the
second Trump term, President Trump
announces that he is going to use
tariffs in a much more aggressive,
wide-ranging global way. And for that
authority, he turned to a different
statute, IPA, the International
Emergency Economic Powers Act of 1977.
And as the statute says, it's meant for
emergencies.
>> And remind us, Adam, what was the
emergency that the president was
claiming to justify these tariffs?
>> The president identified two
emergencies.
One, he says fentinel is entering the
country and he needs to take action
against Mexico, Canada, and China. And
the other he says it's an emergency that
we've had persistent
trade deficits and that requires tariffs
against almost the entire globe. But a
bunch of small businesses affected by
the tariffs and several states took a
different view and said that the statute
he invoked this AIPA statute did not
authorize the tariffs that he wants to
impose and they sued and the cases they
filed went to the Supreme Court.
>> So let's talk about the arguments today.
I listened to them also and they were
pretty expansive. They stretched for
almost three hours and a lot of time was
spent really digging into the statute
that you mentioned IPA. So where do you
think we should begin?
>> Yeah. So, I think it probably makes
sense to spend a minute with the statute
because it does say that if there is a
national emergency of the kind we were
talking about, Rachel, the president may
prescribe by means of instructions,
licenses, or otherwise. And then it says
a bunch of things he can do like there's
15 verbs. He can investigate, he can
block, he can regulate, he can nullify,
he can void, he can prohibit. the
importation or exportation of various
goods, but it doesn't include the word
tariff or any similar word duty, tax,
impost. And it's an open question
whether it authorizes the president to
impose any tariffs, much less the
expansive, aggressive ones that he
instituted at the beginning of his
second term.
We will hear argument this morning in
case 241287,
learning resources versus Trump. And
>> so when the court heard arguments,
>> Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the
court,
>> the administration's lawyer focused on
two key words.
>> The phrase regulate importation plainly
embraces tariffs, which are among the
most traditional and direct methods of
regulating importation.
>> This enormous string of verbs, he says,
what's important here is the president
can regulate
importation
>> this way the power to impose tariffs is
a core application of the power to
regulate foreign commerce which is what
the phrase regulate importation in IPA
naturally evokes
>> and that's a central question for the
justices do you get from regulation of
importation to tariffs
>> because the idea here being the statute
doesn't actually include explicit
instructions that the president can tax
or tariff so the government is making
the argument that regul includes
the ability to tax and tariff.
>> Right. And
>> Mr. Kio,
>> thank you, Mr. Chief Justice. And may it
please the court.
>> The challengers say
>> tariffs are taxes. They take dollars
from Americans pockets and deposit them
in the US Treasury. Our founders gave
that taxing power to Congress alone.
>> Hey, if that's true,
>> it would give the president enormous
power if you read regulate to include
the power to tax. It's simply
implausible that in enacting AIPA,
Congress handed the president the power
to overhaul the entire tariff system and
the American economy in the process
allowing him to set that there are any
number of ways in which the statute
actually an issue in the case does not
confer the power to impose tariffs. It's
just not there. He says
>> so Adam talk a little bit about how the
justices drill down into what the
statute said.
>> So it has a lot of verbs. It has a lot
of actions that can be taken under this
statute. It just doesn't have the one
you want.
>> Well, I would say the
>> So, part of the argument turns into a
kind of grammar seminar.
>> The word license is used in AIA. It's
not used as a verb, it's used as a noun.
>> Really trying to understand not so much
what the purpose of the statute was, but
just what the words mean. Justice
Katanji Brown Jackson for instance
>> said
>> other places where Congress wants that
particular form of regulation to be used
they say impose duties they say you can
tax
Mr. president here. They don't say that
>> that Congress knows how to authorize
tariffs. Congress does that all the
time.
>> And you look at all the tariff statutes
that Congress has passed. I I mean they
use language about revenue raising
tariffs and duties and taxes. Um all the
language that does not appear in the
statute you rely on. Several justices
make the point of the statute
>> that the absence of the word tariffs or
synonyms, duties, taxes, imposts is
significant.
>> Right? It almost felt like the liberal
justices were trying to speak the
languages that we often hear from
conservative justices, which is to stick
to an extremely literal interpretation
of the text.
So it's true that the liberals were
quite happy to be textualists and
literalists and the conservatives
kind of faced a choice if they followed
that road. That's a road that's quite
rocky for the administration. But it's
quite hard for them to run away from
that methodology because there's really
broad agreement among the conservatives
that textualism, the words of the
statute are what count and we're not
going to try to look at what the
consequences of a decision are. We're
just going to look at the words.
>> Can I just ask you a question? For
instance, Justice Amy Coney Barrett,
who's a key vote in this case, asks the
government's lawyer,
>> "Can you point to any other place in the
code or any other time in history where
that phrase together regulate
importation has been used to confer
tariff imposing authority?" Well, as to
regulation,
>> can you give me any other other example
ever in the history of the nation where
it the power to impose tariffs has been
conferred by a statute that doesn't even
mention tariffs any bobs and weaves and
>> I think I think our argument goes a bit
further than that as interpretive matter
because if you look at that history the
history of delegates
>> could you just answer the justice's
question?
A liberal justice Sonia Sotomayor knows
that this is a good thing that she
should jump up and support Justice
Barrett says just answer the question
and Barrett returns to it. So they
really care about what the words of the
statute say.
>> Even for the Supreme Court, this seemed
like an unbelievably close parsing of
specific words.
>> This is not unusual for the court in a
minor case. This is exactly what they
do. They roll up their sleeves and they
try to understand what the statute
actually conveys, what the words
actually mean. It's pretty unusual
though, Rachel, you're right about this,
for a blockbuster case to seem to turn
on this kind of close reading.
>> So why do you think that happened in
this case?
>> Most of the time the really big Supreme
Court cases involve the Constitution,
which is written in general terms and
which is the subject of endless
precedence. and they're working in a
different kind of mode there. When
they're working on a statutory case, one
that simply asks, do the words of the
statute authorize a given action?
They're much more likely to take this
kind of close reading approach. So, this
is a real forensic exercise. It's it's
not, you know, freedom of speech. It's
not equal protection. It's like what did
Congress in 1977 do? So obviously the
justices spent a lot of time parsing the
meaning of a few specific words, but one
thing that they didn't spend a lot of
time parsing, which I thought was kind
of interesting, was whether or not the
fentinel crisis and the trade deficits
actually constituted an emergency. Did
that strike you as interesting also?
>> Yeah, I was surprised by that. I do
think that
there's a tendency to defer to the
president's judgments about the state of
the world that he's better situated than
nine people in robes to figure out what
is an emergency or not. They also didn't
much deal with another textual concept
because whatever he's authorized to do,
it has to deal with the emergency. And
you know, Rachel, it's really not clear
that CARIS on Canada deals with the
fentinel crisis. It's also not clear
that what can look like capricious and
mercurial impositions of tariffs and
then unimposing them the next day deal
with trade surpluses. So the court kind
of gave that spotted that to the
president and focused on the question of
did this statute authorize tariffs? Did
it give him this tool?
But all of this was only one part of the
argument. [music]
The justices also thought that some
really significant hurdles stood in the
way of President Trump and some of the
justices on the right side of the court
were quite skeptical [music] that the
president could overcome those hurdles.
[music]
We'll be right back.
So, Adam, before the break, you told us
that some of the justices were quite
skeptical that the administration would
be able to overcome some other major
hurdles in order to keep their tariff
authority. Walk us through what those
hurdles are.
>> So, the most significant one, and you're
right to call it major, is the major
questions doctrine, which is a kind of
principle of statutory interpretation.
It has been around for a couple of
decades, although it's really quite
recent that the court has started to
refer to it by name.
And what it says
is that if the executive branch
wants to do something really big,
Congress has to authorize
that really big move in plain direct
language. So, we were talking in the
first half, Rachel, about whether you
could tease out of the words regulate
importation,
authorization of tariffs.
Even if you could, there's this separate
hurdle that says if we're talking about
things of vast economic consequence,
the major questions doctrine kicks in
and you're required to the executive
branch is required to show that Congress
really meant it, that it wasn't a kind
of inference from words in the statute
that were 20 words apart. Justice Scalia
used to say
Congress doesn't hide elephants in mouse
holes. It needs to say so directly.
>> In other words, even if the justices
ruled that the word regulate includes
tariff authority, there's this whole
separate question of did Congress
actually tell the president that he
could use this power?
>> Right? I mean, if we were talking about
a tariff for $20,000
about some perfectly routine thing, that
that's one thing. But the major
questions doctrine says if it involves
vast economic consequences, this
different rule is triggered. And there's
really no question but that these
tariffs
could hardly be bigger economically.
Now, the Supreme Court used the major
questions doctrine repeatedly to reject
Biden administration initiatives on
COVID, on student loans, and on climate
change. When the court rejected the
Biden administration's student loan
plan, they said, "This is $400 billion.
That's a staggering sum of money." Well,
the sums of money involved here,
according to the administration, will
easily go into the trillions, and that
sure would seem to suggest that the
major questions doctrine plays a role
here.
>> Council, um, some time ago, you
dismissed the applicability of the major
questions doctrine, and I I want want
you to explain that a little bit more. I
mean it's
>> so Chief Justice Roberts invokes the
major questions doctrine directly early
in the argument.
>> You have a claim source an AIPA that had
never before been used to justify
tariffs. Uh no one has argued that it
does um until this this particular case.
And he asked the government's lawyer how
it can be that a statute that doesn't
name tariffs, that's never been used in
its 50-year history to justify tariffs
and that's being used uh for a power to
impose tariffs on any product from any
country for any length of time satisfies
the major questions doctrine. about it.
The justification is being used for a
power to uh impose tariffs on uh any
product uh from any country uh for in
any amount for any length of time. That
seems like I'm not suggesting it's not
there, but it does seem like that's
major authority and the basis for the
claim seems to be a misfit. So why
doesn't it apply again?
>> And what does the government's lawyer
say to that kind of questioning? Well,
we agree that it's a major power, but
it's in the context of a statute that is
explicitly conferring major powers. That
the point of the
>> government's lawyer says first and not
entirely persuasively
that AIPA is the kind of plain direct
language that you need to satisfy the
major questions doctrine. Uh but his
backup argument is his better one
probably. He says
>> as to that point I believe uh uh uh
[clears throat and groaning] uh the
court has never applied the major
questions doctrine in the foreign policy
context.
>> The court has never applied the major
questions doctrine in the foreign policy
context.
>> Why would it be the case that foreign
affairs would be exempt from the major
questions doctrine?
>> The idea would be that domestic taxation
is for Congress and if Congress wants to
delegate some of its authority perhaps
it can. But the president takes the
leading role in diplomacy and as
commanderin-chief
in looking after national security. So
the theory is that the constitution
gives congress power in one setting and
gives the president substantial power in
the other setting.
>> And so I guess in this case the question
then becomes do tariffs actually count
as foreign policy? Right.
>> Yeah that's the question. We have never
applied it to foreign affairs, but this
is a tariff. This is a tax.
>> It is a It is a
>> Justice Sotomayor says it. It's true.
We've never applied it to foreign
affairs,
>> but this is not foreign. This is a
tariff. This is a tax. I
>> I just don't understand this argument.
Um it's not an article. It's a
congressional power, not a presidential
power to tax. And you want to say
tariffs are not taxes, but that's
exactly what they are. The solicitor
general
>> arguing for the administration says no
>> it is a it is a if I may it's a
foreignfacing
regulation of foreign commerce that's a
regulatory system
>> this does seem to raise a genuinely
interesting question which is whether
tariffs are domestic policy or foreign
policy right like is it kind of hard to
disentangle a distinction between the
two
>> yeah it sure seems to be some of each
these are domestic businesses
paying domestic taxes
largely in aid of trying to bring
manufacturing back to the US. But of
course, they're also part of the
president's
diplomatic negotiations
to try to address
a drug crisis and a foreign balance of
trade. So, it's it's sum of each, right?
And this distinction came up, you know,
throughout the argument.
>> Um, if one of our major trading
partners, that's for example, China, uh,
held a US citizen hostage,
>> you had Justice Clarence Thomas asking a
hypothetical question. What if China
held a US citizen hostage? Uh could the
president short of embargoing or setting
quotas say the most effective way to
gain leverage is to impose a tariff for
the purpose of uh leveraging his
position to uh recover our hostage. And
I think he meant for that to suggest
that the president should have available
to him all kinds of tools
>> to execute important national security
measures and protect American citizens.
>> Seems worth noting though that tariffs
does not really seem like something you
would deploy to rescue a hostage. But go
on.
>> I had the same idea, Rachel. Every
everyone wants the hostage out. But I
think there are things much more
immediate than tariffs which the
president could use to achieve foreign
policy goals. Uh but be that as it may,
the question from Justice Thomas did
indicate that at least some justices
thought that it was important to empower
the president to be assertive and nimble
in protecting the nation's interests.
>> Justice Gorsuch.
General, just a few questions following
up on the major questions discussions
you've had
>> and then Justice Gorsuch in an extended
series of questions
and one in which he became quite
forceful.
>> So, could Congress delegate to the
president the power to regulate commerce
with foreign nations as he sees fit,
>> delay and collect duties as he sees fit?
>> We we don't uh we don't assert that
here. That would be a much harder case.
Now in 179
>> isn't that the logic of your of your
view though?
>> I don't think so because we're doing
>> indicated deep skepticism that Congress
can simply hand over to the president
important legislative powers.
>> If that's true what would what would
prohibit Congress from just abdicating
all responsibility to regulate foreign
commerce for that matter declare war to
the president?
>> Gorsuch says what if Congress decides
tomorrow we're tired of this legislating
business. We're just going to hand it
all off to the president. We'll let him
declare war. We'll let him uh impose
taxes.
>> That's what I'm struggling and waiting
for. What's the reason to accept the
notion that Congress can hand off the
power to declare war to the president?
>> Well, we don't contend that again. That
would be
>> you do you say it's unreable.
>> That is unacceptable. Justice Gorsuch
said.
>> All right. So now you're admitting that
there is some non-delegation principle
at play here and therefore
>> there's a legal concept called the
non-legation doctrine which forbids the
legislature from handing over unlimited
legislative power to the president at
least without very detailed guidance.
>> He's basically saying this is a slippery
slope, right?
>> Uh he's absolutely saying that and
>> you emphasize that Congress can always
take back its powers. You mentioned that
a couple of times.
But don't we have a serious retrieval
problem here? Because
>> he went on to say that there's a problem
with that kind of turning over of
legislative authority to the executive
branch, which is Congress can never get
it back as a practical matter.
>> That's the political process working.
There was
>> it takes a super majority veto majority
to get it back
>> because you need new legislation that
could overcome a presidential veto. And
no president is going to give back such
power once he or she has achieved it
>> over. The president's a one-way ratchet
toward the gradual but continual
accretion of power in the executive
branch and away from the people's
elected representatives.
>> I disagree with that and it seems to fit
with the very broad conception the Trump
administration has of the power it
claims Congress has seated to it.
>> Raise the same issues.
>> Okay. Thank you, General.
You know, it feels worth pointing out
that this conversation we're having
about handing the executive branch power
and whether this is a slippery slope is
not happening in a vacuum. It's
happening at a time when the country is
in in the middle of a of a conversation
basically about whether President Trump
is seizing too much power in the
executive branch in in all different
arenas. And so I just wonder if you feel
like this particular discussion is
loaded or what kind of broader context
you Adam are applying to it. I think
those comments really did address
the current situation where we're seeing
a president who's trying to acrue
maximal power and the justices live in
the world. They're aware of that. And
Justice Gorsuch's comments really moved
the discussion
from the parsing of the statute and how
to interpret the statute and whether the
major questions doctrine which is a
doctrine of statutory interpretation
applied or not to a constitutional
question of the proper relationship
between the two elected branches
and whether the court should tolerate
either
the president claiming or even Congress
agreeing to give the president power
that ought to be reserved to Congress.
>> And for all those reasons, we ask the
court to reverse both the decisions
below. Thank you, councel. The case is
submitted.
>> And I guess I'd say that if the
administration has lost Neil Gorsuch, it
may well have lost the case. M
>> that you've heard skeptical questions
for sure from the chief justice, Justice
Barrett, Justice Gorsuch, the three
liberal justices
are sure to be voting against the
administration and this case is
complicated, has a lot of moving pieces,
is a rare jump ball in an era where the
court usually is quite predictable.
Nonetheless, on the evidence of the oral
argument, these tariffs at least may
well not survive.
>> And when can we expect a decision in
this case?
>> The court has put this on a fast track.
The administration has asked for really
quick treatment. They think even having
this case pending makes it harder for
them to negotiate with uh their foreign
counterparts. So unlike most big cases
which don't come till June whenever
they're argued, I think it's quite
possible this case emerges in a month, 6
weeks quite fast by Supreme Court
standards.
>> As we said in the beginning of the
conversation, President Trump's tariffs
are kind of a the signature of a second
administration. And so if the court did
not rule in his favor, that feels like a
hugely significant blow to his policy
agenda. And the timing of these oral
arguments can't help but feel a bit
notable given that they came one day
after the Democrats had blowouts up and
down the ballots in all these different
states. And also this is all coming in
the midst of a recordbreaking government
shutdown. And so taken together this
week feels a little bit like a
referendum on the president's agenda in
some way. I mean, I know that these are
disconnected, but that's a bit how it
feels this week
>> at the Supreme Court. It did feel like a
shift, an inflection point. And so, it's
notable. Two things are notable. One,
that Trump would take this as a real
blow. He has said that a ruling against
him would be a cataclysm. It would
destroy the nation. and he has used the
most apocalyptic terms to describe what
such a ruling would be like. Uh even to
the point that some people thought he
was trying to intimidate the court. But
two, and building off of that, if this
court, which has in recent months green
lit lots of Trump programs
on an emergency basis, provisionally,
temporarily, but nonetheless, all sorts
of programs. If it stands up to
President Trump now, that will be a much
more assertive image for the Supreme
Court and the beginning of probably a
real clash between the president and the
court.
So we may be seeing really for the first
time in the second term the Supreme
Court saying hey we're a branch of the
government too and we have a role to
play and we are not going to accept in
every setting the efforts of a president
who seems committed [music] to acrewing
as much power as he possibly can at the
expense of the other branches.
>> [music]
>> Adam, thank you so much.
>> Thank you, Rachel.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
The Trump administration announced on
Wednesday [music] that it would cut 10%
of air traffic in 40 of the nation's
busiest markets in a move that analysts
said would force airlines to cancel
thousands of flights while the
administration [music] tries to force
Democrats to end the government
shutdown.
Transportation Secretary Shawn Duffy
[music] said the cancellations were an
attempt to quote alleviate the pressure
on air traffic controllers. They've not
been paid since mid-occtober.
Duffy said that the affected markets
would be announced on Thursday [music]
and the cuts would go into effect on
Friday.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by Rob
Zipco, [music] Eric Krupkkey, and Nina
Feldman. It was edited by Devon Taylor
with help from Lisa Chow. Contains music
by Marian Lozano and Dan Powell, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.